[Music.]
Hello everyone and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
My name is Tom Turbiville.
Our purpose here today is to give a very well-deserved spotlight on the men and the women who gave some of the best years of their life to defend their country.
Some served on the front lines.
Some served in support roles.
They all gave their best years.
And we are going to honor those veterans of the Brazos Valley, including those that are fighting now in Operation Iraqi Freedom, those who fought in Vietnam, those who fought in Desert Storm, Korea,
and the people that we fondly know now as our greatest generation, the men and the women who fought in World War II.
It is my very pleasure to introduce you to Dr. Jim Cooper, Lieutenant Commander, U.S.
Navy.
Dr. Jim Cooper, how are you, doctor?
I'm doing fine today, Tom.
Dr. Cooper is my doctor that I'm very proud to say, and he is a practicing physician here in the Bryan College Station area.
And you're one of the youngest, actually, veterans of World War II that we have here in the Brazos Valley.
You served both in Korea and in World War II.
I am the youngest World War II veteran in our Veterans of Foreign War organization here in Bryan, yes.
And I'm 77 years old, so that says something for the guys who are ahead of me.
Now, Dr. Cooper is very quick to point out that he did not serve in direct combat in either World War II or in Korea, but the sailors that he mended along the way are awfully glad that he was there.
You are a practicing physician now.
We're going to talk a little bit about that more later, but I want to talk about your service in World War II in Korea.
You were a young teenager right after VJ Day, and you saw a lot of remnants of the war as a very young man.
Tom, I was 17 when I enlisted and then went to boot camp and was on my way to Japan.
when World War II ended with the dropping of the first aid bomb.
And there are questions that come up about whether or not I'm in favor
of having dropped those two A-bombs, and the answer is always overwhelmingly yes, because had those two bombs not been dropped, I might not have been here.
I would have been in the first invasion forces going into Japan, and it was estimated that there would have been four million casualties had we invaded Japan, three million Japanese and one million
Allied forces and so even though there was a great great sacrifice of life with those two bombs and we wish we had not Had to drop them.
It was a necessary thing.
It was something that saved countless millions of lives And we're sorry that some people had to be sacrificed for that We talked about the remnants of war that you witnessed that you saw I cannot Underestimate the horror that you must have seen.
I know that you were in Nagasaki you were in Wakayama
other places like this to where you really saw what the war did.
By the time I passed by Nagasaki, I never set foot on the ground there, but I was in a city called Wakayama, which was on a little inland from the coast of Japan.
And it was a city of over 100,000 people before the war and during the war.
And the only thing left standing in that city of 100,000 people were the bank vaults.
And the reason they were left was because they were cement and steel.
You went to medical school at the University of Tennessee, I believe?
Correct.
But you had been actually in the Navy both before and after you went to school, is that right?
I was an enlisted man during World War II and then came back, went to medical school, and then rejoined the Navy and interned in the Navy and then served in the Atlantic
during the Korean War.
Talk about your service.
The USS Admiral Benson I believe was one of your ships.
That was a very interesting thing from the standpoint of people in Bryan, Texas in that USS Admiral Benson was a Navy transport ship and we boarded the Benson in San Francisco headed for Japan and
On the way to Japan, after about 38 days, we went by both the islands of Iwo Jima.
The battle was already over, of course, in Iwo Jima, but the spoils of war were there and there was just destruction everywhere.
Tanks and cars, trucks and everything just blown to smithereens, airplanes on the beach.
There were ships that were sunk out in the harbor and so forth.
And we just passed by there.
Then we went on to Okinawa and anchored.
But prior to the time that we got to Okinawa, there was a tremendous hurricane, which you would call a tsunami now.
And the USS Admiral Benson was a 20,000 ton ship and it was being tossed around like a matchstick.
And it is of further interest that after I got back to Bryan,
This was in 1945 and then in 1955 I came to Bryan and then about four or five years ago I was talking to a man whose name is George Ferreri here in town.
He's now deceased.
And George let me know that he was on a ship in a typhoon in Okinawa.
I said, when?
He said, in 1945.
I said, I was on a ship in a typhoon in Okinawa in 1945.
And I said, what ship, George?
He said, USS Admiral Benson.
I said, George, I was on the USS Admiral Benson.
So George Ferreri, Travis Bryan, and I were on the same ship in World War II and didn't know it until about five years ago.
The world is smaller than we think.
It's very small.
Absolutely.
Very small.
Now you went to the University of Tennessee, went to medical school there, and then you re-enlisted in the Navy.
And you spent some time at Bethesda in Washington.
That was quite an experience for you.
It was a most delightful experience in that you saw all the major naval characters from World War II who were still alive.
At one time, we had three five-star admirals in the hospital.
There was Halsey, Halstead, and Nimitz were all there at one time.
Well, there were four because Admiral King actually lived in the hospital.
and Cordell Hull was there, the Secretary of State who met the two Japanese representatives before Pearl Harbor or after Pearl Harbor had occurred.
And it was just a parade of historic characters through that hospital.
Since this was in 1952, World War II was not that far away, and there were still a lot of people alive who served in World War II.
And Shirley Temple was even a patient there while I was there.
What rank were you then?
I was a Lieutenant J.G., not the lowest guy on the totem pole.
And you're giving physicals to Nimitz and Halsey and folks like that.
What...
That had to be a little intimidating.
This was very intimidating when you would walk into the room and here'd be a man with two stars, three stars, four stars, and five stars.
And here I am, a lowly Lieutenant J.G., and I thought, my God, what in the world am I doing here?
So yes, it was intimidating, but now that I look back and reflect on it, it was the most interesting part of my life, and I cherish it.
Of course, to them, at that moment, you were their doctor, not just a doctor.
a young up-and-coming naval guy.
You were their doctor at the time.
I was not their primary doctor, but I was the lowest guy on the totem pole, so I had to do the physical exams.
You talked about in the Korean War, you spent your time with the Atlantic fleet.
In the North Atlantic, yes.
At the time I was aboard destroyers, I was a destroyer squadron medical officer, and I had eight destroyers, and I could ride on any one of the destroyers that I wanted to.
One of the destroyers you would recognize, it was called the USS The Sullivans, and it was named after the five brothers who died during World War II, I think on a cruiser, but I'm not sure.
They sank on a cruiser and all were killed during World War II, and so they named this ship.
So that was one famous ship that was in that particular squadron that I happened to be in.
You told me once about an experience that you'll never forget involving the USS Bennington, an explosion.
Tom, during World War II, all of the catapults on carriers, there were no catapults on the carriers during World War II except toward the end.
And the USS Bennington was a carrier that had been built toward the end of World War II and then upgraded.
And these catapults are the things that launch airplanes off these ships.
You see them on all carriers now.
And they were all hydraulically operated.
And they were launching airplanes right at dawn.
And this is the time that all the officers were in the wardroom eating.
Both the doctors on the Bennington were in that wardroom eating.
And this catapult had a leak in it.
And fumes formed.
Hydraulic fluid fumes formed.
It went through the ventilation system and was ignited.
and killed 103 people instantly, and we got 285 or six severely, severely burned patients from the USS Bennington in about six or seven hours after that accident happened at the Newport Naval Hospital.
I was not stationed at the Newport Naval Hospital, but I was on destroyers in the bay, so they took all the physicians off the ships in the bay and put us over at the Newport Naval Hospital.
And here come these helicopters with these severely, severely burned men from the Bennington.
Both doctors were killed during the initial explosion, so all they had was the corpsmen who did a marvelous job taking care of them.
airlifted them back into us and it was a very very difficult time in my life and one that I certainly wouldn't want to relive again.
Talk about the Korean War.
There's so much romance involved and there's so many movies involved involving World War II and there's so much right now so much credit and adulation given to what they call the greatest generation of World War II.
The Korean War kind of snuck in there in the late 40s and the early 50s.
It maybe doesn't get the press or get the ink that World War II does as far as our education of wars today.
But you were part of that Korean War.
Talk a little bit about that war, what it meant to you as a veteran and what it meant to America.
Tom, as I've pointed out to you on many occasions before, as far as I know, I never had a bullet shot at me.
And during the Korean War, I was on a submarine patrol in the North Atlantic on these destroyers.
And you mentioned different wars, Iraqi War, Desert Storm, Vietnam, Korea, World War II.
If a bullet hits you, it's the same as if it were the Civil War, World War II, Korea.
So I've always said to these groups of students that I go and talk to periodically, war is not pretty.
and there is no pretty war.
There are romantic wars, but when you get down to the nit and gritty grind and the daily chores that these guys do from day to day, none of it is very pretty.
So all wars are very similar in that people are maimed, people are taken away from their homes, people's homes are destroyed, countries are destroyed, and their governments are uprooted,
It's just a destructive, destructive thing, and we need to learn to live in the world in a different way rather than going to war with each other.
And that's a thought that a lot of people have today.
As we look at what's happening in Iraq, there's obviously there are people that don't think that we should be there.
There's people that think that we should, that we have to fight terrorism on every front.
I guess there's obviously things to be said for both arguments.
Without getting too deep, what's your thoughts?
Tom, terrorism, of course, is on my mind all the time as it is on a lot of people's minds nowadays.
And it's a war that probably can never really be won in that this is like saying you're going to stamp out crime in the whole world.
We have large police forces.
We have people who try to do this and they do a good job.
But you don't ever stamp it all out, so there's always going to be a need for somebody in the United States and all the other countries in the world to be ready to go to war.
Let's just hope that we don't have to go and be involved on the basis that we are now.
Certainly no criticism, and certainly I really, really love the troops in Iraq, and I
My heart goes out to them and I honor them and certainly thank them from the bottom of my heart for being there.
I know what they're going through.
It's certainly a different kind of battle, obviously, because when you were fighting or when you were involved in World War II in Korea, we knew the enemy.
We knew the weapons that they held.
We don't know what's coming up to hit us in the back.
The guy coming down the street, and I just saw this day before yesterday, I think, was in a police uniform and gained access to this police compound and had a bomb on him and blew himself up.
So yes, the answer is that they're fighting an unknown enemy, really, and it makes it very, very difficult for them to identify and to have plans to fight even.
How do you plan against somebody you don't even know who you're fighting against?
Exactly.
Let's lighten it up a little bit.
Let's go to 1954.
I guess you retired from the active service and you went into the reserves at that time.
Talk about that and how you found your way to Bryan, Texas.
Actually, it was your brother, Dr. O.C. Cooper, a beloved physician in this town who we lost not too long ago, who actually found Bryan College Station before you did.
O.C.
was drafted actually into the Air Force.
He was in the U.S.
Army during World War II and was in medical school actually during most of World War II.
And then got out and then during the Korean War was drafted back into the Air Force and was stationed at Bryan Air Force Base.
I got out of the Navy before O.C.
got out of the Air Force and I was looking for a place to practice.
So I came to Bryan.
There had been about a five or six year drought here.
The ground was all cracked open, the grass was brown, and the cattle were dying.
And I looked at Brian and I said, my gosh, who would live there?
And I turned around and drove back to Illinois and went to Portland, Oregon.
And it rained 365 days.
And I said, my gosh, I know a place that's dry.
And I came back to Brian.
And you've been here ever since?
Been here ever since 1955.
Talk a little bit about your practice.
You're a practicing physician.
You see patients every day.
Every day.
And also, you serve as an aviation medical examiner, senior aviation medical examiner.
Talk a little bit about that role.
If you want to be a pilot and you live in this town, you've got to go through Jim Cooper.
Is that right?
Well, you don't have to go to me because there are two other guys here in town who do physicals, but I'm a senior aviation medical examiner, which means that I do examine airline transport pilots or commercial pilots, you would call them.
and I do a lot of pilots from out of town even who have been here in school and then when they've gone off and gotten jobs with the airlines they keep coming back here for their physicals and yes this is an interesting job you meet a lot of interesting people and I think that maybe you may allude to one of them later on during our conversation.
A lot of young men and young women who want to be pilots.
So you meet a lot of these people.
So you can give them, I guess, a little bit of advice about what it takes also besides being their medical guy.
Tom, I've seen people start out from the zero point in their flying.
And during the Vietnam War, I had people who came through A&M.
took their private pilots training at the Eastwood Airport, went on into the Air Force, and then went into combat in Vietnam.
There were several of them that I had watched grow and go into combat from Texas A&M.
You've probably given those type of exams to folks and then their kids too, right?
Absolutely.
Don't want to talk about your age, but you've probably seen a few generations.
Tom, I'm not ashamed.
I'm 77.
but still one of the youngest World War II veterans around this valley, right?
Absolutely.
Fascinating career just here in Bryan College Station.
I want to talk about a couple of things.
You have a relationship, a friendship, and you knew
Dr. Werner Von Braun, and that's quite a historical figure.
Talk a little bit about how you knew the doctor.
Tom, I was privileged through my flying to have known a man in Dallas by the name of J.R.
Maxfield who was a physician.
He was a nuclear science pioneer in medicine, and he and Dr. Von Braun were very, very good friends, and through Dr. Maxfield,
I attended all the Apollo launches, seven through 17, and we were two and a half miles from launch.
And in going to the Cape, I met a lot of the German scientists, one of whom happened to be Dr. Von Braun.
Dr. Von Braun was a pilot.
And Dr. Von Braun needed a physical exam on one or two occasions, and I was privileged to be able to do his aviation physical exam for him.
We just put up a picture.
I don't know if we can put that back up on the screen.
It was a photograph.
There it is right there, Jim.
that he autographed for you, this hangs on your wall in your office.
It does, and I'm very, very proud of it, Tom.
Very proud.
Those are all the Saturn rockets behind him that launched our major satellites.
And the Saturn V launched the vehicles that went to the moon.
and thus your involvement also with the space program.
I understand that you saw, what, nine or 10 Apollo launches.
Is that right?
You saw them, and what was your involvement with that?
Well, seven through 17, so there were 10 launches.
All manned Apollo flights, I was there.
Up until Apollo 11, I was just an observer, and during Apollo 11, I met some Australian newsmen, and since there were no satellites in Western Australia, or there were no satellites in orbit then for transmission of radio and television signals,
They did not have live coverage of the Apollo program in Western Australia, so they contracted with me to do a phone-type presentation of the launch from the Cape to their studio in Perth, Australia.
So I gave a voice commentary of the Apollo launches 12 through 17 to Perth, Australia.
That's outstanding.
Let's bring it back here home.
Texas World Speedway is down the road, and when they were really blowing and going and holding the races, they were very strong for a long time, and then they sort of went away for a while and then came back about eight or nine years ago.
But you were involved with Texas World Speedway as their main medical man.
Talk a little bit about that involvement.
time I was, except for the first two races they had there, I was involved in every major race up until near the end that they had.
This was both Indy cars and NASCARs and stock cars that raced below the NASCAR level.
And I did meet some interesting people out there, had some interesting experiences.
There's one right now.
As a matter of fact, we're looking at, I think people, anybody that knows anything about racing knows that gentleman on the left, AJ Foyt.
Remember that picture?
What were you talking to him about?
AJ had just, he was in an Indy car and he had just backed into the wall during about 190 miles an hour and they brought him, it was a rule that they had to come to the hospital after they'd had an accident.
They brought him down to the hospital and he had a huge scrape on his helmet, which indicated his helmet had scraped along the wall.
and I was concerned about the fact that he might have a head injury even though he was up walking around talking.
I told the powers that be that I didn't think he should drive in the next race, which was a stock car race, and he was talking to the people up in the tower telling him he was going to drive in that race.
He did drive in the race.
After the race, he did not remember driving in the race.
So you all had a little bit of a difference of opinion when that picture was taken.
We did have, but A.J.
prevailed.
He drove in the race.
That probably doesn't surprise you.
Not at all.
He's known as a man of his own thoughts, and he'll listen to your advice, but not always take it.
He won't take it.
He has his own book of advice that he reads and does things on his own all the time.
Jim, I know you're very involved as a past commander of the VFW post here in Bryan College Station.
Talk a little bit about what your involvement is with that organization.
Obviously it's a wonderful organization, one that is home to a lot of our older and younger veterans.
Tom, I wish that the younger veterans would become more active and we as the older leaders in that organization should recruit these young men because
The Veterans of Foreign Wars has on their agenda many, many, many civic programs.
We sponsor kids in the seventh, eighth, and ninth grade.
They have a program called the Voice of the Patriot's Pen where they write a little essay.
And I was just over at the Caldwell Post not long ago and they presented
the winner with a $500 check, the second place person got a $250.
No, it was $1,500 and $250.
And here we give war bonds to these people that write these essays.
Then the juniors and seniors in high school participate in a program called the Voice of Democracy.
And these kids, the guy, the child who won the
National program about three years ago got a $75,000 scholarship from the VFW.
We do a lot of things with the scouts.
We go to schools promoting patriotism.
We just came from Hammond Oliver School this past week doing history of World War II.
The lady who taught the history class wanted us there to give a hands on.
And it was just delightful to talk to these kids and tell them a little bit about the history of the armed forces during World War II, Korea.
And then we had Vietnam veterans there.
We had one Desert Storm veteran there.
So the VFW organism is not a static organism.
It's a viable, energetic organism.
that we do support youth, we support many, many civic projects, we support patriotism, and there are a lot of activities that we would like to promote in the community.
It's got to please you, I would think, that in this day of our education,
concentrating so much on technology and modern technology and where they're going with that, that you have teachers that call you up and say, hey, we don't want our kids to forget what happened 50, 60 years ago and the people who made that happen.
You've got to only hope that that's still going to be the case 5, 10, 15, 20 years down the road.
There is no better way for these kids to learn than to talk to some of us, and their eyes just become widened when we show them pictures of us in our Navy uniforms, and there was one man who had some Auschwitz,
prison camp pictures and I think he's going to be on your program.
So I won't steal his thunder.
That's right.
But when you have hands on things like this and when you're talking to these kids directly and they're asking you questions that are not answered in the history books and you can tell them of your experiences, this means a lot more to them.
It is
indelibilized on their mind a lot more than it would be if they saw a picture in a history book that had no bearing on anybody or anything that they knew anything about.
So I think we do a good job in giving our point of view from the person who was there during the event that was occurring at that time.
And they've got their eyes open.
We weren't there for the crucifixion.
And they've got their eyes open and they're listening and they're trying their best to understand and they're absorbing it.
And that's what's important.
Jim, we've got a couple of minutes left.
Sum up what does it what does it mean to Dr. Jim Cooper to be a a veteran, an American veteran. First time I'm proud to have served. Second is I look around and I see young men and I pray and I hope that things can be worked out in this world where the horrors that some of the other people went through that I didn't have to go through even though I was in the armed forces,
I hope that these young men don't have to do this.
There are better ways to settle world problems than shooting at each other, maiming each other, destroying your cities, destroying your bodies.
And we need to meet on some common ground somewhere that will prevent this from happening.
And certainly the World War IIs, the Vietnams, the Koreas, the desert storms, our action in Iraq now,
There has to be a better way.
We as human beings are smart enough to go to the moon.
We ought to be smart enough to find a way out to be veterans of world peace and not foreign wars.
Dr. Jim Cooper, thank you for being with us today.
We thank you very much for your service.
Thank you.
Dr. Jim Cooper is one of the many proud members of the greatest generation that we treasure here in the Brazos Valley.
And he and many others help keep the spirit of our veterans alive.
We salute Dr. Jim Cooper and all the veterans of the Brazos Valley.
Thank you for your service.
And please do not forget the next chance you get to always thank a vet.
Do it every day.
For Dr. Jim Cooper, I'm Tom Turbiville.
Thank you for joining us.
Thanks for watching.
We'll see you the next time
on Veterans of the Valley.
[Music.]